INTRODUCTION
One of the paradoxes of the Pakistani economy has been the persistence of widening income inequalities and weak social development in spite of high growth rates. The adverse distributional consequences of a capital-intensive trade and industrial policy, coupled with a skewed agrarian land distribution and a political economy based on rent-seeking by a small group of the population, have contributed to Pakistan's high poverty profile. Although incidence of absolute poverty seems to have declined in the 1970s and 1980s, the speed of the decline has not been as rapid as other fast-growing countries. There are indications that the incidence of poverty has risen in the 1990s. High agricultural growth rates have not made an appreciable dent on rural poverty, and the high growth rates in the large-scale manufacturing sector, due to their low employment absorption, have not had a positive effect on the urban poor. The open unemployment and disguised unemployment rates would have been much higher but for the safety valve provided by migration to the Middle East in the 1970s and 1980s.
Poverty alleviation and redistribution of income have been central concerns of development economists since the early 1970s, although the mechanisms to reduce poverty are still debatable. 
The preoccupation with poverty alleviation and equitable income distribution goes beyond the narrow economic dimension. Social cohesion and stability among and within nations owe a great deal to both the actual and the perceived sense of equity and access to opportunities for production and employment. Lifting out of poverty and a rise in income and consumption provide greater command over commodities for poor households. Furthermore, recognition of the importance of human capital has been one of the key themes in development economics in the last two decades. The idea is that investment in assisting the poor has important spillover effects on the rest of the economy, besides the alleviation of poverty. 'Redistribution with growth' stresses the importance of income equalization as a prerequisite for economic takeoff. In sum, a country's success in the alleviation of poverty is vital not only for its developmental success, but for maintaining political and social stability
The hypothesis that economic growth and equality are incompatible, at least in the initial stages, advocated by Simon Kutznets, has been challenged in recent years by a large volume of research that has found that policies fostering economic growth are not inconsistent with reducing poverty. The effects of growth on inequality depend on the initial distribution of assets, the nature of imperfections in markets (especially the capital market), the pattern of growth, factor bias in technology, and government policies, especially fiscal, social welfare, and trade (Bardhan, 1995). The theory that growth can have positive effects on the alleviation of poverty is borne out by much recent research. Lipton and Ravallion (1995) report estimates for eight developing countries
(Bangladesh, Brazil, Ivory Cost, Indonesia, Morocco, Nepal, and Tunisia) that a 2 per cent annual rate of growth in consumption per person will typically result in a decline in the poverty gap index of 3 to 8 per cent (Lipton and Ravallion, 1995). The East Asian Miracle demonstrates a positive link between growth and more equal income distribution. There is growing empirical evidence

that supports the claim that a reasonable degree of equality is good for development.
DIMENSIONS AND TRENDS
From a methodological point of view, most studies on poverty in Pakistan are limited to estimating the headcount ratios for single years based on the Household Income and Expenditure Surveys (HIES). These studies are thus limited by the grouped nature of the published data from these surveys and by the arbitrary basis on which poverty lines have been set up (Malik et al, 1994). S. Malik, in his recent seminal work, has stressed the need to assess the overall gains in welfare in terms of poverty, as measured from private incomes and consumption, and in terms of the levels of public incomes, measured through the trend in social indicators and public expenditures (Malik, 1994). While there is a relative dearth of analysis of poverty in Pakistan, the literature on poverty in India is voluminous and many of those findings are analytically relevant to Pakistan.
Nevertheless, there is a widespread consensus that the poverty profile of Pakistan followed a Kuznetian trajectory. In the early years, the extent of poverty in Pakistan increased, verifying Kutznet's hypothesis of an inverse relationship between economic development and income inequality. In the 1970s and 1980s, the trend had been reversed, in terms of headcount index, but more recent data supports a stagnation of this trend (Table 4.1). Observed income inequality measures have fluctuated widely, but adjusted measures point to a widening gap between the top and bottom
quintiles.
A number of papers have analysed the issue of poverty in Pakistan, surveying the trends using different methodologies. Two main bodies ofevidence suggest that poverty increased in the early years but declined from the early 1970s (World Bank b, 1995). The

first source is the published data on the national accounts, the distribution of household income, and the real wages of unskilled workers. The second is a number of studies that have sought to measure the incidence of poverty based on survey data. While both systems have their relative strengths and weaknesses, the trends are similar, regardless of the methodology used.
In the pioneering work of S. M. Naseem in the early 1970s, an analysis of the trends in rural poverty using the household surveys of income and expenditure showed that the proportion of people in poverty, with poverty being arbitrarily defined as the level of expenditure consistent with the intake of 95 per cent of the minimum caloric requirement, increased during the 1960s in spite of the high growth rates of the rural economy (Naseem, 1977). Since the head•count measure of determining poverty is highly sensitive to definitions ofthe poverty line, a relaxation of the line shows that the findings of increased poverty do not hold any validity. Thus, the results for the 1950s and 1960s are ambiguous.
The trends from 1970 to the present time tell an entirely different story. Consumption poverty has declined since the mid-1970s due to a combination of factors. While GDP per capita increased in real terms by about 70 per cent between 1972—3 and 1993—4, private consumption per capita increased by about 50 per cent. Given the difficulties in estimating poverty based on income declarations, the consumption poverty measure is the best index of poverty in Pakistan. Moreover, this result is also substantiated by other complementary indicators. The data on the real wages of unskilled urban construction workers and of agricultural workers show that average real wages have increased annually by 1.1 to 2 per cent (depending on location) for the former and 3 per cent for the latter since the mid-1980s (World Bank b, 1995).
The evidence for this reduction in poverty is corroborated by a plethora of studies that use survey data to measure the extent of poverty. Studies that have measured the incidence of poverty

for one, two, or three years using different methodologies, have confirmed the decline in consumption poverty.
Irfan and Amjad (1984) derive estimates of the proportion of people in poverty in 1979, using a poverty line that assumes 2550 calories per day per adult equivalent and actual observations, as opposed to the grouped data analysis of the previous researchers, to determine an income-based poverty line of Rs 109 per capita in 1979 prices. Their finding is that the incidence of poverty increased from 32 per cent in 1963—4 to over 43 per cent in 1969—70 and then declined to 29 per cent in 1978—9 (Irfan and Amjad, 1984).
Malik, using grouped data from the Household and Expenditure Surveys from 1963—4 to 1984-5, sees an increase in the per centage of poor households in the 1960s and a decline in the 1970s and 1980s (Malik, 1988). Ahmad and Ludlow, attempting to avoid the arbitrariness involved in the construction of the poverty line, use several different lines to measure poverty, and then take the medium line to find that poverty declined by about 20 per cent between 1979 and 1985 (Ahmad and Ludlow, 1989). Ercelawn, using a very strict concept of undernourishment to define absolute poverty, finds that the incidence of poverty on the whole has been quite modest, and regards Pakistan as fortunate in relation to acute poverty and its risks of malnourishment and starvation (Ercelawn, 1990).
Malik (1993) finds that, on aggregate, monthly expenditures of Rs 185 per adult equivalent were required in 1984-5, Rs 241 in 1987—8 and Rs 320.42 in 1990-1 to meet the minimum calorie requirement of2550 calories per adult equivalent per month, with considerable variation across regions. Moreover, the finding that the expenditures of the poor grow at rates higher than that of the overall price level in order to maintain the same minimum calorie requirement is a conclusion with disturbing implications.
Further statistics confirm these findings. The national headcount ratio, which measures the incidence of poverty, fell from 46 per cent in 1984—5 to 37 per cent in 1987—8 and then to 34

per cent in 1990—1, using the reference poverty line of Rs 296 per capita monthly expenditure in 1991—2 rural prices and Rs 334 in urban prices (World Bank b, 1995). Between 1990—1 and 1993-4, a 3 per cent growth in private per capita consumption reduced the incidence of poverty from 34 per cent to 22 per cent, but the findings must be taken with a degree of scepticism given the scarcity of data on the distribution of household consumption at the time.
A comparison with other countries for the period 1984—5 to 1990—1 shows that, while the average annual compound rate of decline in Pakistan's head-count ratio was 4.9 per cent, a comparable East Asian figure was 8 per cent (World Bank b, 1995). However, combined poverty head-count ratios for sub-Saharan Africa and Eastern Europe remained constant during 1985-90, while the combined poverty head-count ratio for the Middle East and North Africa increased during the period, as did that for Latin America and the Caribbean. Thus, Pakistan performed well in the 1970s and 1980s when compared to its international competitors, with the exception of East Asia. The more recent slowdown in the economy since the early 1990s does suggest that the incidence of poverty may have risen. Although there is no corroborative empirical data, a number of observers have used the secondary and collateral information to arrive at this conclusion. The results of the next household survey will reveal if this hypothesis is borne out by the evidence.
The migration of a significant proportion of unskilled workers to the Middle East after the oil price boom and their remittances, averaging $2 billion annually, equivalent to 6—7 per cent of GDP, played an important role. The home remittances accrued to the families belonging to the levels closer to the poverty line, and these income flows enabled them to be lifted out of poverty.

URBAN AND RURAL PROFILES
Generally, urban and rural poverty trends have followed an identical pattern to the national trends, with an increase in the first two decades followed by a decline since the mid-1970s. However, the magnitudes of change have varied more. While in the 1950s and 1960s the poverty growth rates were higher in the rural than in the urban sectors, in the 1980s the incidence of poverty fell more in urban areas than in the rural area (World Bank b, 1995). Poverty incidence has, nevertheless, been significantly higher in rural areas than urban areas, both in absolute terms and in relative terms, although the higher cost of living in urban areas reduces that gap significantly (Table 4.2). A variety of different indices reach identical conclusions about the geographical distribution of poverty. In the Household Income and Expenditure Survey of 1990—1, while 28 per cent of the urban areas are poor, the rural figure is 36.9 per cent, leading to a national average of 34.0 per cent, since 70 per cent of people live in rural areas and 30 per cent in urban areas.
Currently, of the urban poor, 44 per cent are wage earners, 36 per cent are self-employed, and 20 per cent are either inactive or undetermined (World Bank b, 1995). Poverty head-counts correspond well with the level of asset holdings in both the wageearner and self-employed category; among wage-earners, whitecollar workers have the lowest poverty head-count of 22 per cent, while casual and manual labour have the highest incidence, at 38.8 per cent in the self-employed sector. The highest incidence of urban poverty was found, among those whose assets are valued at less than Rs 1,000. The poverty head-count ratio for this group was 51 per cent. This group, consisting of about 10 per cent of the urban sample, together with the industrial proletariat, compose the backbone of urban poverty in Pakistan.
In the rural sector, where the bulk of Pakistan's poor reside, tenants constitute a sizable group of 14 per cent and have a poverty 188
head-count at 44 per cent, while agricultural labourers, making 7 per cent of the population, have a poverty head-count of 56 per cent (World Bank b, 1995). Among non-agricultural rural households, the groups with the highest poverty head-counts are casual workers (at 45 per cent) and the self-employed with less than Rs 1,000, having a headcount ratio of 46 per cent. Asset ownership in the rural areas corresponds to the urban pattern and is inversely proportional to poverty incidence. In the agricultural sector, a highly unequal land distribution creates large differences in wealth and income.
The poverty profile of Pakistan therefore leads to the following picture. Poverty is more widespread among the rural population, and the groups that are likely to fall below the poverty line are landless agricultural labourers and casual workers. In the urban areas, the poor are the self-employed with assets valued at less than Rs 1,000.
INCOME DISTRIBUTION TRENDS
The inequitable agrarian structure, the industrial bias of Pakistan's development strategy, the alternation of economic regimes, the import substitution trade strategies, and the political economy of rent-seeking and absence of strong countervailing forces that could challenge the power of the elites have all influenced the extent and intensity of income distribution in Pakistan. The links between economic policies and income distribution have been welldocumented in the development literature, and Pakistan presents an interesting test case of the linkages.
The hypothesis that income inequality increases with economic growth is very plausible in Pakistan's case. The argument that the shift in the structure of production from agriculture to industry will result in higher capital-labour ratios in the expanding sector and a consequent rise in profits relative to wages and a further

widening in income differentials due to rapid growth in demand for skilled labour bears merit for Pakistan. The household income Gini Coefficient, the leading indicator of income distribution, declined in the 1960s from 0.356 in 1963—4 to 0.345 in 1971—2. But it has gradually risen since the early 1970s to 0.407 by 1990-1 (Table 4.3). Except for a decline in the mid-1980s, the overall trend for the last two decades indicates growing income inequality. While in 1971—2 the ratio of the household income share of the highest 20
per cent of the population relative to the lowest 20 per cent was 5.4 per cent, by 1985-6, it increased to 5.8 per cent, and by the early 1990s it had reached 6.1 per cent. Thus, income distribution had clearly worsened.
In an international comparison, Pakistan's performance was respectable compared to Latin America countries, which clearly have the most skewed income distribution, but was inferior to many of the countries in Asia in the 1980s. Estimates for the early 1970s do not show much difference between Pakistan and other Asian countries, but by the 1980s, Pakistan had lagged behind. The high growth performance ofEast Asian countries was accompanied by both poverty reduction and decline in income inequalities. However, Pakistan joins the rank of the 50 per cent of developing countries whose inequality has worsened with economic growth, especially in the last two decades. By contrast, countries such as Indonesia, Korea, Taiwan, the Philippines, and Sri Lanka have all had appreciable improvements in income distribution.
A recent study by Deininger and Squire calculates the ratio of the top quintile's share of income to the bottom quintile's share for a large number of developing countries (Deininger and Squire, 1997). This average ratio, that spans a twenty to thirty year period, in many cases looks quite favourable for Pakistan. But it masks the fact that the higher inequality of the 1980s and 1990s is offset by the low inequality of the 1970s (Table 4.4).
Thus, Pakistan presents the paradoxical picture of a country with both worsening income distribution and improved poverty
 

alleviation. These contradictory findings can be reconciled when it is seen that, while economic growth did much to reduce the number of absolute poor, it did not result in an increase of the ratio of their income relative to the richer segment of the population.
DETERMINANTS OF INCOME INEQUALITY
A. AGRARIAN STRUCTURE
Being the mainstay ofthe economy and the area where most of the poor reside, the rural sector has been both the beneficiary and the victim of technological progress. The effects of agricultural change on rural poverty have been mixed as Pakistan has embarked on a whole series of policies to increase agricultural productivity. Thus, Pakistan provides a good background for an analysis of the effects of the pace and pattern of agricultural growth on poverty and income inequality.
The key factor affecting income distribution in the rural sector is the nature of the agrarian structure: the land tenurial system and the institutional climate. A large number of models have stressed the importance of the distribution of endowments and the potentially large increases in social welfare gained by an initial redistribution of assets (Banerjee and Newman, 1994). Bourguignon and Morrisson (1990) have found that, in a typical cross-sectional regression for a sample of developing countries, the distribution ofland explains about 17 per cent of the variance in inequality (Borguignon and Morrisson, 1995). In this context, the impact of land reform policies must be assessed. Land reforms can have important direct and indirect effects on tenurial status and land distribution, thus influencing income levels of the bottom quintile in the rural areas. By providing security of tenure through land redistribution in favour of small peasants, tenants, and landless labourers, and by contributing to self-cultivation of land,
	INVESTING IN 	191
land reforms can play a part in alleviating rural poverty. Both the Martial Law Regulations of 1959 and the 1972 Land Reforms were aimed at improving the rural distribution of income by instituting ceilings on landholdings and providing incentives to tenants to crop. However, given the meagre amounts of redistributed land, these reforms have not been far-reaching—they have provided benefits to about 10 per cent of the tenants, about 300,000 farm families, thus failing to make an appreciable dent on the inherited agrarian structure.
Compounding the failure of land reforms, thin credit markets have persistently been heavily biased towards the large landlords. Chenery, has argued that, without a redistribution of at least the increments of capital formation, other distributive measures are not likely to have a lasting impact on the poverty problem (Chenery, 1974). Despite increases in credit in recent years, credit in terms of sectoral GDP has been below 10 per cent. These imperfections, in credit and insurance markets, and the usually costly private adjustments to these imperfections, are the key to understanding the important distinctions between transient poverty, caused largely by relatively short-term income variability, and chronic poverty (Bardhan, 1995). Given the fragmentary and weak nature of the rural money markets in Pakistan, the dearth of credit from official sources to small farmers meant that the poor in rural areas could not overcome the critical credit shortages needed to buy important inputs to boost agricultural productivity as well as make productive investments in human capital, especially education. Bourguignon and Morrisson (1990) find that educational difference explains about one-fifth of the variance in inequality. Pakistan is a prominent example of a country where skewed land asset distribution, severe credit market imperfections, and differentials in educational attainments combine to negate the effects of high growth rates on improved income distribution.
Another factor influencing income inequality outcomes in the rural sector has been the technological change in agriculture.

While in the 1950s, Pakistan's agricultural growth rate remained very low due to the industrial bias of the development strategy, the situation in the 1960s changed radically with the introduction of new technologies in seed, fertilizer, tubewells, and tractors, which dramatically boosted growth. In the 1950s, while the rural poor stagnated with little in the way of new employment or productivity gains. the number of landless workers had increased by 350 per cent between 1951 and 1961 (Naseem, 1977). The absence of any policies to improve the agricultural sector in the 1950s, and the intersectoral transfers from rural to urban sectors, had laid the foundation for a worsening urban-rural income gap.
By the mid-1960s, the Green Revolution in agriculture had resulted in spectacular increases in yields of wheat and rice. Although there is substantial evidence for the hypothesis that the biological and chemical innovations that generated this rapid growth in Pakistani agriculture have been scale-neutral in terms of cost per unit, mechanical innovations have had an adverse effect on income distribution because they have been capital-using and labour-displacing (Khan Mohsin, 1991). Many small farmers participated in the seed and fertilizer revolution, perhaps lagging a year or so behind the large farmers in adopting the new techniques. The absence of significant scale economies meant that the fruits of agricultural research could be shared by all. The reduction in time required for land preparation and the increase in cropping intensity due to technological progress had a beneficial effect on agriculture.
However, in the two critical areas of tubewell technology and tractorization that accompanied the seed-fertilizer technology, the effects on income distribution were visibly negative. With regard to tubewells, subsidized credit was more readily available to large farmers because they possessed greater familiarity with administrative procedures. According to the Farm Mechanization Survey of 1968, 70 per cent of the tubewells in Pakistan were installed by farmers having more than 25 acres, while only 4 per cent were installed by the group possessing 0—13 acres (Naseem, 193
1977). Tractor mechanization has been perhaps the most incomeredistributing of Pakistan's agricultural policies. Although the main rationale for the introduction of tractors was to improve cropping intensity, the big-farm bias of the tractorization programme has been strong, with estimates suggesting that the labour force per acre In mechanized areas has decreased by more than 50 per cent. According to a joint survey by the World Bank and the Agricultural Development Bank, of the farmers who received ADBP loans to purchase tractors, there was a 140 per cent increase in the average size of farms, from 25 acres to 109 acres per farm, with 80 per cent of the new land acquisition coming from land already in use (Naseem, 1977). Thus, the increase in large farm size meant a displacement of tenants and small farmers. Overall, the total labour used per cropped acre, made up of family, regular, and casual workers, dropped by 40 per cent, meaning a net destruction of five jobs per tractor; thus the total displacement effects of the 40,000 tractors introduced in the late 1960s and early 1970s has been about 200,000 workers. A variety of indirect effects of the farm mechanization programme on small landowners and wage labourers, such as the effects of tractorization on farm eviction rates, demand for land, and general level of wages, suggests that mechanization has had a much more negative effect on income distribution than the numbers show.
In a critical decomposition analysis using three-year panel data from 727 households, it was found that returns to labour and crop profitability in Pakistan were as important, if not more important, sources of agricultural income inequality than unequal landownership, as measured by land rent (Alderman, 1993). The policy implications of this are that, from the standpoint of the government, it is far easier to improve the productivity of land through subsidies, technology transfers, and sound pricing policies, as well as through the technologies of crop production, than to alter the distribution of land. Since Pakistan's strong feudal land tenure system is highly obstinate to change, perhaps the best way to

alleviate rural poverty is through measures to create higher returns for labour and enhance the profitability of crops.
In sum, although technological progress resulted in some poverty reduction due to the spread of new varieties of inputs to small farmers, sharecroppers, and tenants, the less than uniform diffusion of technology in the critical areas of tractors and tubewells has resulted in worsening income distribution in the rural areas. Policies to promote high and sustained agricultural growth that favours small-scale farmers and landless labourers represent the best measures to improve the plight of the rural poor. Exploring the relationship between growth and poverty in rural India, Ravallion and Datt have found that measures of absolute rural poverty responded elastically to changes in mean consumption, but agricultural growth had no discernible impact on the share of total consumption going to the poor (Ravallion and Datt, 1995). Their finding that the rural poor can gain from agricultural growth, with about half of the long-run impact coming within three years, holds considerable promise for Pakistan. Major policy changes that address ways to improve the technical efficiency of inputs as well as cropping intensity are the best hope for improving rural income distribution. A sound land reform policy that reduces the power of the large landlords is also important, given the important role the skewed agrarian structure plays in fostering income inequality. The increase in the Gini Coefficient of the distribution of land from 0.52 in 1972 to 0.58 in 1991 needs to be reversed. Thus, it is vital to formulate a new agrarian reform policy.
B. TRADE AND INDUSTRY
Pakistan's industrial policy has been a major factor explaining the incidence and intensity of poverty and income inequality. The import substitution industrialization strategy followed for the first three decades of its existence have had a pronounced
195
impact through a variety ofchannels and mechanisms. Firstly, the favourable treatment of industry was achieved by discrimination against agriculture and an underinvestment in agriculture, where most of the poor reside. The high intersectoral transfers from agriculture to industry, the turning of the terms of trade against agriculture, and the bias in agricultural exports due to overvalued exchange rates maintained to allow sustained industrial output and access to cheap capital imports, have militated against the agricultural poor.
Furthermore, within industry, the capital-intensive pattern of industrial development has led to a redistribution of income away from the urban poor and to the large industrialists. The perceived inequalities of the Ayub years and the high industrial concentration figures prompted the reforms of the Bhutto years. The preference for import-substituting manufacturing industries, supported by a high degree of effective protection, such as industrial chemicals, iron and steel, and petroleum products, and the neglect of the small-scale industries, in areas as diverse as sporting goods, leather manufactures, and surgical instruments, with their higher-than-average labour-intensive production, has translated into lower or declining incomes for those who did not participate in the large-scale manufacturing sector. The low absorption of labour force by the large-scale manufacturing sector exacerbated urban unemployment. Furthermore, poor labour legislation in the manufacturing sector, with unionization protecting few workers, did not help to improve the expansion of employment opportunities. Most of industrial profits were reinvested in laboursaving plant and equipment or absorbed by industrialists for conspicuous consumption. Industrial workers' wages also rose, albeit at a lower rate than the profits earned by the owners.
In order to improve the urban distribution of income, casual labourers and the self-employed with very small asset holdings must become the beneficiaries of government job-creation programmes and of targeted income and subsidy schemes. A system of providing

basic social services to urban slums, in collaboration with NGOs, represents an important channel by which these issues can be addressed.
C. FISCAL POLICY
In many countries, government tax and expenditure policies have been instrumental in combating poverty and improving income distribution. The case of Pakistan stands on the other extreme— the tax system was highly regressive, based on indirect taxes, and the expenditure pattern favoured the well-to-do segments of the population. The low coverage and poor collection of direct taxes have meant that a large proportion of earned incomes is virtually exempt from any payment of taxes on income or property. The reliance on indirect taxes results in an unfair burden on lower deciles, thus having adverse effects on the poor and lowering their purchasing power.
The weakness in resource mobilization efforts has pushed Pakistan's fiscal deficit to 8 per cent ofGDP in recent years, forcing the government to indulge in extensive borrowing to finance this deficit. Finance has not been available for important social welfare programmes that could assist the poor. The importance of lowering the deficit in order to have sustained economic growth has been well-recognized. Furthermore, the onset of structural adjustment programmes, under the sponsorship of the IMF and the World Bank, has caused Pakistan to focus more on the importance of maintaining its macroeconomic fundamentals in order to achieve long-term growth.
D. SOCIAL PROTECTION
Social protection in Pakistan is basically a composite of private and voluntary transfers and government arrangements. Since the social

welfare system in Pakistan suffers from all the chronic weaknesses of such systems in developing countries, private transfers are currently the main means of protecting the economically disadvantaged.
The private social safety net in Pakistan is supported by large private, voluntary, inter-household transfers. Forty per cent of all households nationwide were part of the network of private transfers in 1991, with 30 per cent of these households net recipients of transfers and 10 per cent, net donors (World Bank b, 1995). Transfers have been especially important for the poor, with 48 per cent of households in the lowest income strata net recipients of transfers. These households have used the transfers to finance half of their development expenditures. The positive effect of private transfers on the poor can be gauged from the fact that the average consumption in households without transfers was only 64 per cent of the average consumption of households who were net recipients of private transfers (Rs 15,617 compared with Rs 24,413) (World Bank b. 1995).
At the government level, two targeted income transfer programmes provide the rudiments of Pakistan's welfare state— the zakat and ushr programme and the Bait-ill-Maal programme. Together, they complement private flows to redistribute income.
Zakat and ushr are basically Islamic charity programmes of special taxes and transfers instituted in the early 1980s to assist the poor. Basically, these schemes finance income transfers to the poor specifically widows, orphans, and disabled individuals—with direct cash payments to 400,000 carefully selected nationwide beneficiaries at a rate of Rs 225 per beneficiary allowance. While zakat taxes are levied on a range of financial assets at a rate of 2.5 per cent annually, ushr taxes are levied on the produce of landowners that exceeded 948 kilograms of wheat or other crops of the same value. Organizationally structured at a multi-tier level. with central and regional offices, total zakat receipts are first apportioned between funds to be retained at the federal level and

funds to be transferred to the provinces. However, in spite of all the strengths, in 1993—4 total zakat revenue amounted to Rs 2.844 million, which translated into a negligible 0.2 per cent of GDP; similarly, the total amount of ushr tax collected amounted to an insignificant Rs 200,000.
A wide range of criticism has raged in recent years over the efficacy of the programmes and their operational weaknesses (World Bank b, 1995). The misuse ofzakat funds has been so patent that in 1991, although 50 per cent of benefits went to the poor, about 28 per cent went to people who cannot be considered poor. Furthermore, the number of direct beneficiaries of subsistence allowances exceeded 1.5 million in 1993, thus diluting the impact of the scheme. An average monthly payment of Rs 38 per direct beneficiary has done little to reduce the incidence of poverty. Theoretically, the current subsistence allowance of Rs 225 monthly should be adequate to finance the poor's income gap of Rs 84, defined as the average shortfall in the consumption of the poor relative to the poverty line. In practice, however, the presence of dependents and multiple beneficiaries has thinned the gains to any individuals. A third line of attack has focused on the inadequacy of revenue collection. Two prevailing practices, the withdrawal of deposits in the days before the collection dates and the false declaration of oneself as non-Muslim, have substantially reduced the zakat revenues, with Rs 1,767 million collected on savings accounts (Rs 3,494 million available) and Rs 527 million on fixed deposits (Rs 1,268 million available). These discrepancies suggest that violation of the codes is pervasive.
Another federal government programme, established in 1992 to help the poor that are not among zakat's target group, the Bait-ul-ðlaal programme has several components, with the Food Subsidy Scheme (FSS), targeted to non-zakat recipient households whose monthly income is less than Rs 1,500, and the Individual Financial Assistance (IFA), targeted to widows, orphans, and disabled persons who also have monthly incomes of less than Rs

1,500 (World Bank b, 1995). While the IFA families receive Rs 300 monthly for a household head, and Rs 50 monthly for each child up to a maximum of four, FSS benefits are Rs 150 monthly for each household. Unfortunately, like the zakat and ushr programmes, the Bait-ill-Maal has been strongly criticized for its use of household income ceiling as a screening device, given the problems associated with income assessment, and for its limited coverage, with only about 400,000 households receiving FSS benefits and 10, 280 receiving IFA benefits, thus ignoring more than 1.2 million households that are eligible beneficiaries. Thus, the programme does not seem to have made a major dent in poverty alleviation.
Although social welfare programmes are prominent and directed credit schemes popular, the impact of all government programmes on both rural and urban poverty is quite small. Only through sounder targeting, an improvement in coverage, and a repair of leakages and abuses of the system can these programmes improve Pakistan's income distribution. The delayed trickle-down effects of high growth rates has been so slow that a pro-poor policy action is vital. However, in the wake of the government's structural adjustment programmes and the consequent reductions in budgetary subsidies, these transfers will be increasingly difficult to expand, given the high political and administrative costs.
REGIONAL EQUITY
The gains from Pakistan's industrial development and agricultural growth have not been evenly distributed around the country (Pasha, and Hasan 1982). While Sindh and Punjab have been relatively prosperous, Balochistan and NWFP have remained relatively backward. The geographical location of much of Punjab and Sindh—around the Indus and its tributaries—as well as the large populations of those areas, has meant that development has been concentrated in that area. The choice of Karachi as capital,

the ISI regime's capital-intensive industrial strategy, and the Green Revolution have all contributed to the development of Punjab and Sindh as leading regions of the country.
Estimates of poverty incidence show that Sindh is the most prosperous province and has a lower poverty incidence than Punjab. The Green Revolution was predominantly focused in the Punjab, and the adverse distribution consequences of mechanization seem to have been most prominent in Punjab. Rural South Punjab has a high incidence of poverty, with 50 per cent of the population below the poverty line, in comparison to rural North Punjab (26—32 per cent) and rural Sindh (31—6 per cent). While Punjab is richer than the other provinces, intra-provincial disparity is most prominent there. The NWFP is considerably poorer than the national average, with different estimates ranging between 20 and 40 per cent poverty incidence. Finally, Balochistan's poverty estimates waver between 22 and 41 per cent.
In an attempt to quantify the level of development of different districts using a wide variety of development criteria such as agricultural growth, industrial presence, housing, and human resource indicators it was found that Karachi, Lahore, Rawalpindi/ Islamabad, Quetta, and Peshawar were the first five districts in terms of level of development (Pasha, and Hasan 1982). On the second rung, a large group of districts from Punjab, including Multan, Jhelum, and Sargodha, were found to show the broad-based character of regional development in Punjab. Of the country's 23
most underdeveloped districts, 9 are in Balochistan, 6 from Punjab, 5 from Sindh, and 3 from NWFP. Thus, while Balochistan is clearly the poorest region in the country, Punjab has not managed to redistribute its wealth and the fruits ofthe Green Revolution. While many of these findings are conventional wisdom, other findings of intra-provincial disparity show the presence ofhighly concentrated pockets in backward regions like Balochistan and NWFP, and large pockets of poverty in rural Sindh and rural Punjab. 15 per cent of

the population of Punjab and 24 per cent of that of Sindh live in underdeveloped districts.
Many factors explain both inter-and intra-provincial disparities in income distribution. Literacy, housing, transport, basic municipal services, and sexual equality indicators have been found to be highly correlated with the overall level of development of a district, while income and wealth indicators are less important.
In conclusion, while Sindh and Punjab are the most advanced provinces, a district-level analysis reveals a more nuanced picture.
POPULATION
Rapid rates of population growth have emerged in recent years as the single most important factor thwarting the economic achievements of the less developed countries. The demographic decline witnessed in most parts of the world is beginning to reach South Asia, where high growth rates have eroded many of the positive achievements of development policy. Higher fertility has translated into lower per capita incomes and increased the burden on society. The economic costs of feeding, clothing, and educating a larger and larger population have been substantial, and the pressures on infrastructure and scarce resources have exacerbated.
Pakistan, together with Sub-Saharan countries, has been conspicuous in the persistence ofpopulation growth rates above 3 per cent. The economy's dependence on agriculture and the weak investment in education and health show the pernicious effects of high growth rates on the economic, political, and social structure of the society. The reductions in both current welfare and that of future generations is a factor that has to be taken seriously.
Despite an ambitious population planning programme begun with much fanfare in the mid-1960s, myriad public pronouncements on the importance of reductions in the population growth rate, and a host of policies and schemes to assist in fertility decline,
 
	PAKISTAN: THE ECONOMY OF AN ELITIST STATE
the growth rate has not changed significantly since Partition. The rapid population growth rate in Pakistan has been responsible for a host of maladies—inability to spread the economic gains, difficulties in the absorption of labour by industries, and exacerbation of ethnic tensions. Despite repeated claims about the importance of human resources, population growth has been detrimental to Pakistan's economic performance. The human capital endowment in Pakistan, notwithstanding its quantity, has been qualitatively weak.
CHARACTERISTICS OF PAKISTAN'S POPULATION
Pakistan's population has been growing at a rate of over 3 per cent since the early 1970s, in comparison to a rate of 2 per cent in the first two decades of its history (Table 4.5). The current population of Pakistan, estimated at around 130 million, makes Pakistan the seventh most populous country in the world. The population growth rate has been so rapid that the population has quadrupled since the early 1950s. Although the accuracy of these figures is subject to the degree of coverage and accuracy of the censuses, there is an unmistakable acceleration ofthe growth rate since 1960 (Sathar, 1991).
The increase can be attributed to the decline in mortality rates from 31 per 1,000 in 1941 to less than 10 per 1,000 by 1998 (Table 4.5). This is mainly due to the curtailment of infectious diseases, especially cholera and smallpox, and the introduction of antibiotics (Sathar, 1991). Furthermore, there has been a marked increase in levels of sanitation. By contrast, the crude birth rate has decreased very slightly, from about 45 per 1,000 in 1941 to 36 per thousand in 1998. The total fertility rate, the number of children a woman bears during her reproductive span from 15 to 49, is estimated 5.6 births per woman. A large body of evidence has brought out the lack of decline of fertility rates in the last two decades (Sathar,

1984; Population Welfare Division, 1986). In spite of controversies, there is a consensus that fertility decline in Pakistan has not been significant.
Thus, mortality decline represents the greatest victory, in spite of the persistence of high rates of mortality in infants and in women— the infant mortality has stabilized at a relatively high level of 100 infant deaths per 1,000 live births, while female mortality exceeds male mortality, at least during the reproductive period (Sathar,1987; Irfan, 1986).
An analysis of the population data for Pakistan reveals a series of interesting trends. The most noteworthy is the increasing urbanization of the country. (Table 4.6). While 17.2 per cent of people lived in urban areas in 1951, by 1998 the figure had reached 32.5 per cent, with a corresponding decline in rural population. Due to a combination of high rates of natural increase and significant rural-urban migration influenced by the search for higher wages and the desire for a better life, the urban growth rate in the last two decades has been more than 4 per cent, with the urban population increasing more than sevenfold between the early 1950s and the late 1990s, in contrast to the less than fourfold increase of the rural population. Interestingly, and in contrast to other countries, urban fertility in Pakistan has not been found to be lower than rural fertility (Sathar, 1979; Casterline, 1984). The growth of large urban metropolises like Karachi, Lahore, and Faisalabad represents the triumph of the principle of urban agglomeration. It is important to note that in spite of its large index of urbanization, Pakistan remains a predominantly agrarian society, in explicit contrast to Latin American countries, where the majority of the population lives in the urban areas.
A second trend has been the larger male population as a percentage ofthe total population. Although the ratios of males to females has remained relatively constant over the last forty years, the larger male population at Partition has resulted in a significant difference in the magnitudes of the two populations. Estimates for

1996 suggest that there are 6 million more males than females in Pakistan, a non-trivial sum with important implications for the economy and society.
Thirdly, Punjab has the lion's share of the population, with 55.6 per cent according to the latest census in 1998 (Table 4.7). The shares of Sindh, NWFB and Balochistan are 23.0, 13.4, and 5.0 per cent respectively. While the Punjab rate has decreased from 60.8 per cent in 1951, the shares of Sindh (17.9 per cent in 1951) and Balochistan (3.5 per cent in 1951) have increased significantly. Meanwhile, the share of NWFP has remained relatively constant over the last four decades. Moreover, population density has been the highest in Punjab, with 230 people per sq. km. followed by NWFP, Sindh, and Balochistan. Although there has been considerable variation ofpopulation densities across the provinces, there has been no population policy directed at the redistribution of population (Sathar, 1991).
Thus, the picture of Pakistan is of an overpopulated country with large geographic, regional, and gender differentials in population, stubbornly high growth rates, unchanging crude birth rates, and declining mortality rates.
REASONS FOR HIGH GROWTH RATES
A variety of factors explain the persistence of high fertility rates in spite of social and economic modernization in Pakistan. Economic, cultural, and social phenomena shed considerable light on the South Asian population debacle.
One major factor in explaining the high total fertility rates is the early marriage of females in Pakistan. More than 50 per cent of Pakistani women marry before the age of twenty—lending truth to the demographic truism that the earlier the marriage age the more likely the chances of conception.

A second factor is the low schooling of women. Data from the 1991 PIHS indicate an inverse association between women's schooling and children borne by women between the reproductive years of 15 to 49 (Berhrman, 1995). There is abundant evidence internationally that well-educated women have fewer children since they have access to many more economic opportunities, and thus have less time for bearing and raising children.
Thirdly, and related to the poor education of women, is low access to contraceptive use. The poor organization of the family planning organizations, the low outreach component, and the cultural suspicion about outside intervention in private areas of sexuality have conspired to produce a low incidence of contraceptive prevalence. Only two-fifths of Pakistani women in a 1991 survey knew of major contraceptives, and less than a quarter of those who knew about these used them. Reasons cited for nonuse included husband preference, religious reasons, cost, and lack of knowledge (PIHS, 1991). Interestingly, there are vast differentials in contraceptive use recorded by the educational attainment levels of women, with 30 per cent of college graduates reported using contraceptives compared to 8.5 per cent of uneducated women (PWD, 1986). Since the increased use of contraception is directly linked to fertility decline in almost all countries of the world, an increase in use of birth control in Pakistan would translate into lower fertility levels. Furthermore, related to this is the lowered rate of breast-feeding. Breast-feeding, which demographic consensus holds to be one of the best natural birth-interval-spacers, has declined in Pakistan for a variety of reasons. Like in India, Indonesia, Korea, and Thailand, reductions in breast-feeding have reduced fertility decline significantly.
Fourthly, the poor income levels of Pakistani society have resulted in an increased demand for children. The demand for child assistance in the agricultural sector, the social prestige of children among the poor, the alternative uses of time that come with wealth, and the importance of children to support the elderly 206	PAKISTAN: THE ECONOMY OF AN ELITIST STATE
in poor families, all,provide the scenario for higher fertility in lower socio-economic classes. Survey and research studies are conclusive in establishing this link in Pakistan.
Fifth, cultural and religious norms have associated high fertility with success and achievement. The high incidence of son-preference has had the unfortunate effect of increasing the fertility rates. The dishonourable bias against female offspring has been an important but neglected factor in explaining the high growth rates.
For a variety of reasons, demand for children has remained high in Pakistan and has proven invulnerable to a series of demographic, economic, and social shifts.
INTERNATIONAL COMPARISON
Pakistan compares very unfavourably with a broad spectrum of developing countries with regards to population growth and labour force (Table 4.8). While the average annual population growth rate for Pakistan is estimated to have been 3.1 per cent for 1980—92 and projected to be 2.7 per cent for the rest of the decade, the corresponding figures in low-income countries are 2.0 and 1.7 per cent (Behrman, 1995). This figure shows the large lacuna that is present between the success stories like Indonesia and Malaysia and the laggers like Pakistan and Kenya. Furthermore, while the Pakistani crude birth rate (CBR) was significantly above the developing country average of 28 per 1,000, the total fertility rate of 5.6 was higher than the 3.4 average for low-income countries. By contrast, the crude death rate of 10 per 1,000 has been at par with the rate of other developing countries, suggesting that improvements in sanitation and vaccination have had a nondifferentiated global impact. Perhaps the most telling statistic has been the extremely low rates of contraceptive prevalence in Pakistan—just over 10 per cent in the last decade, in contrast to the

25 per cent of developing countries. This one statistic alone tells the unfortunate story of the nondecline of fertility rates in Pakistan.
The statistics for the labour force tell a similar story. The labour force growth rate is estimated at 2.9 per cent for 1980—92 and projected to increase at the same rate for the rest of the decade, in contrast to the respective means of 2.2 and 1.7 per cent for all lowincome countries (Behrman, 1995). Moreover, the female share of the labour force in 1992 was 30 per cent in contrast to the mean of 46 per cent for low-income countries. A combination of high proportion of children with low proportion of women means that the share of the labour force in the total population was 30 per cent, far below the mean for low-income countries of 46 per cent (Behrman, 1995).
This has adverse implications for the dependency ratio, implying that for each working person, the number of dependents (young, women, sick, etc.) is increasing over time.
IMPACT OF POPULATION GROWTH
The theoretical literature on population is vast and complex. The linkages between population growth rates, economic development, and human capital formation are quite ambiguous. Growth remains much of a mystery in the neoclassical formulation, and a variety of conflicting hypotheses contest the terrain. Nevertheless, a series of tentative conclusions mark the contours of the research. Numerous efforts to use aggregate country data to examine the possibility of empirical evidence for a significant relation between population growth and per capita income growth have yielded few significant results (Behrman, 1995). The influential East Asian Miracle study found no statistical relations between the average rate of real per capita income growth and population growth rates. In spite of some research suggesting that slower population growth

would be beneficial to economic development, a large arsenal of econometric work has not resolved the issue in any significant way.
Nevertheless, it is abundantly evident that population growth has had a detrimental impact on developing countries through its adverse impact on the quality of human resources and through the pressures on government resources and infrastructure.
Firstly, population growth in Pakistan has had an adverse effect on food security. High growth rates have constrained government policies to provide food for all and forced the country to embark on an expensive wheat import policy. It is obvious that population growth has resulted in an exacerbation of rural poverty and an increase in landless labourers, identified as the most vulnerable group in a series of poverty assessments. One important study suggests that high population growth rates in Pakistan, by affecting the poor disproportionately since they bear more children than the rich, has perpetuated the intergenerational transmission of poverty by lessening the resource investments of the children of the poor (Birdsall, 1994).
Secondly, population growth has had a negative effect on the quality of human resources by lowering investments in education, health, and nutrition, and thus on overall macroeconomic performance. A large annual increase in population has created pressure on a constrained government exchequer and reduced per capita allocations to health and schooling. It is argued that had Pakistan had lower growth rates, it could have enrolled far more children than it did, thus following the East Asian 'virtuous circle' of linking the elimination of the gender gap in basic education with the increase in primary enrolments (Birdsall and Sabot, 1994). Part of the success of the East Asian societies was attributable to the rapid rise in the educational level of women contributing to the sharp decline in fertility rates, which in turn increased the affordability ofexpanding educational opportunities. The pressures on Pakistan government have been strong, however, making it

difficult to finance the investments in education and infrastructure that would have insured sustained economic growth.
Thirdly, high growth rates have had a negative effect on the urban economy. A combination of anecdotal evidence and survey research shows that urbanization in Pakistan has led to an exacerbation of unemployment, air pollution, congestion, social disturbances, and crime. The complex cluster ofservices—housing, traffic, sewerage, and water—that provide the foundations for a vibrant urban economy have been badly affected by the 3 per cent growth rate. The impact of migrants to the urban areas has been mixed. While the skilled and educated among them have contributed positively the same cannot be said about the unskilled migrants. The low employment generation capacity of the industrial sector has not allowed many of these unskilled migrants to find productive work. In turn, this impoverishment and uprootness has translated into resentment and frustration which was easily channelled into riots and violence. The ethnic problems in Pakistan's major cities are partly attributable to this migration. The pressures on urban infrastructure in Karachi, Lahore, Peshawar, Quetta, Faisalabad, and Hyderabad have been tremendous.
The fourth pernicious effect of population growth has been a detrimental impact on women. According to an influential PIHS Survey in 1991, women ofchildbearing age cited the refusal of the husband as the major reason for not using contraception. While the number of children desired by women was 3.9, those desired by the spouse was 4.3 (Behrman, 1995). Thus, it stands to reason that a reduced population growth rate would improve the choices for women and reduce the current burden on them.
Although part of the population difficulties have been reduced by the emigration of about 2 million migrants to the Middle East in the last two decades, resulting in large inflows of remittances, their impact on population has not been significant. Similarly, the 3 million Afghan immigrants do not seem to have substantially
 

changed the structure of the society nor affected the demographic problems.
Thus, population growth in Pakistan has had a deleterious effect on macroeconomic performance, on food policy, on government investment in education and health, on urban infrastructure, and on the status of women. The economic and social losses to Pakistan have clearly outweighed the gains of high growth rates.
FAILURE OF POPULATION CONTROL
By almost all tokens and standards, Pakistan's family planning programme and population control policies have failed resoundingly, even in spite ofsome achievement in recent years in the attainment of targets. For a variety of reasons, the broad array of policies have failed to make any appreciable dent in Pakistan's population growth rate. Despite much fanfare and widely touted schemes, the programme has been disastrous, with rates of contraceptive prevalence stubbornly clinging to around 10 per cent. The fact that the population growth rate has worsened during the implementation of the programme speaks volumes about its ineffectiveness.
Firstly, administrative ad hocism has crippled the programme. Ambitious schemes were launched amidst much excitement and fervor and then quickly abandoned in favour of some new untested approach. A clinical system involving the use of rural midwives to disseminate contraceptive information was abandoned in 1969, after three years, to be replaced by an outreach-based system, in which a team ofmale and female motivators would visit the homes of prospective clients to explain the merits of family planning; this in turn was abandoned because of the 1971 War and replaced by a plan to inundate society with contraception under a USAID-sponsored scheme. Throughout, the family planning programme has been bereft of proper evaluation. No system has

been left in place for a significant stretch of time and then properly evaluated and its consequences understood. In the early 1980s, the controversial decision to reintegrate the programme with the health ministry led to a significant downsizing of the staff and a demoralization that eroded any earlier gain.
Secondly, the programme has been starved of funding. The budgetary difficulties of the Pakistani economy, the importance of defence and debt expenditure in the government budget, and the low interest and investment in the human resource side have severely weakened the programme. While foreign interest and investment has been sporadic, public expenditure has been substantially below the one per cent of GDP mark. Uncertainties over allocation of funds have delayed new projects and schemes that would otherwise have yielded successful returns.
Thirdly, related to the financial constraints, there has been poor quality and low deployment in the outreach component. The ratio of family planning workers to population has been very low in Pakistan, especially in comparison to international success stories like East Asia. A weak network of poorly trained, underpaid workers in populations of high density has not served the programme well. Since its inception, it has been plagued with recruitment problems. While in the late 1960s only a seventh of the midwives assigned as fieldworkers believed in the efficacy of modern contraceptives, in the early 1970s the army of unmarried female motivators from urban areas could not gain the confidence of the villagers.
Fourthly, the low status of women has been a critical factor delaying the adoption of contraception. The gender-bias of Pakistan society, shown by a wide array of indicators, has not provided enough education and confidence for women to practice the techniques of family planning. The high rates of female illiteracy and low access to health and schooling, and male indifference have compounded the problem, as has male resistance to any outside supervision of a personal matter.

Fifthly, religious opposition to the programme has made its acceptance difficult. Allegations that family planning is contrary to the dictates of Islam have abounded, and little attempt has been made by the political elites to incorporate the local tilema in the programme, as was the case in successful societies such as Indonesia and Malaysia.
Finally, political commitment to the programmes has been minimal. In explicit contrast to countries in East Asia such as Thailand, Malaysia, and Korea, the Pakistani political elites have had greater interest in short-term financial gains and in horsetrading. The oscillation between military and civilian rule has not provided that element of political stability that is central to the success of any programme.
In sum, for a wide variety of reasons—organization, financial, religious, cultural—the family planning programme in Pakistan has been quite ineffective in reducing the growth rates. While in the past such factors could be tolerated, this high population growth could be the demographic timebomb that wrenches apart the Pakistani polity unless remedial measures are taken soon.
EDUCATION
A high level of illiteracy is one of the most prominent features of the Pakistani economy and society. The negative effects this has had on economic productivity, performance, and growth are still being spelled out. Crucial deficiencies in both primary and secondary schooling, as well as large gender and regional inequities in the distribution of educational services, plague the Pakistani economy. Internationally recognized as a crucial component of a nation's success, a sound and educated workforce can be the critical factor that explains why some nations fail and others succeed. While the importance of education in fostering development has been a prominent theme in both academic and policy circles for many

years, the role of educational quantity and quality has lately been mentioned as perhaps the single most important factor in helping a country rise out of poverty.
Pakistan's educational performance during its fifty years of history has, in spite of the much touted quantitative expansion at all levels, been dismal, with both the quantity of education barely keeping pace with the population growth and the quality deteriorating significantly. The fact that Pakistan has managed to obtain such high growth rates in spite of such a fragile educational base is one of the central paradoxes of the Pakistani economy.
THEORETICAL INSIGHTS
In the early years of development planning, investment discussions were dominated by plans to increase the physical capital stock. The Harrod-Domar model, which guided developing country thinking and planning in the 1940s and 1950s, was based on the idea that production and output of an economy were crucially dependent on the physical capital stock, which in turn was dependent on the savings rate. The higher the savings rate, the greater the growth rate of output generated by productive investment. While other models recognized the importance of other inputs, only by the 1970s and 1980s did many statistical investigations in the growth accounting tradition find that output had increased at a higher rate than could be explained by an increase in only the inputs of labour and physical capital. This 'residual' difference, total factor productivity, between the rate of increase of output and the rate of increase of inputs, was explained by an improvement in the quality of the inputs. Foremost among the input qualities was the level of education of the workforce. Economic backwardness was highly linked to low labour efficiency and training, deficient supplies of entrepreneurship, and slow growth in knowledge. Much empirical work along these lines linked popular clichés about the importance

of education for economic success with sound statistical proof that the quality of the labour force was as important as the stock of physical capital in contributing to economic growth. A whole new 'human capital' school has emerged, whose main contention is that the quality of the labour force, in terms of education and health, is a very important ingredient for a nation's success (Romer, a 1986).
This work has spawned a voluminous body of research that analyses the role of education in the process of economic development (Maier, 1990). A combination of factors—increased evidence that educational levels are the best proxy for human capital accumulation, the proliferation of high quality microeconomic data sets in developing countries, and the importance the 'new growth theory' places on education in the development process—have made this new research possible. Furthermore, the remarkable success of the East Asian economies and the prominent role assigned to education as a leading factor in their success has motivated other countries to replicate their experience. The effects of educated labour in raising the level of output and rate of growth, the effect of education on the productivity of rural workers, the rates of return on different levels of education, the gender biases in education and the implications of these biases have all been leading topics of research.
With the benefit of the insights offered by this research, it is easier to understand the characteristics of Pakistan's education sector and to offer explanations for the low education-productivity link. Much of the discussion on education in Pakistan has been dominated by clichés that lack a rigorous analytical framework. The new 'human capital' theories attempt to provide that framework.
CHARACTERISTICS OF PAKISTAN'S EDUCATION
Pakistan's adult illiteracy has historically been high, both in absolute terms and in comparison to other countries (Table 4.9).

Pakistan's adult illiteracy rate in 1990 was 65 per cent and was high in comparison to a broad spectrum of developing countries. When compared with a broad variety of countries with differing per capita incomes and geographic locations, Pakistan is consistently at the bottom.
Comparisons of indicators of schooling investment, including enrolment rates, pupil/teacher ratios, and cohort persistence to certain grades yield similar conclusions. By most aggregate indicators, basic schooling investments in Pakistan are low and have been growing less rapidly in recent decades than on the average for low income countries (Behrman, 1995). For Pakistani primary and secondary schooling, 1991 enrolment rates were 46 and 21 per cent, respectively, ofthe relevant age groups—only about half the average for all low-income countries; between 1970 and 1991 they increased by 6 and 8 per cent respectively, much less than half of the increase in the averages ofall low-income countries which came to 27 per cent and 20 per cent. Only about halfof those who enrol in school stay on until the fourth grade in Pakistan, in comparison with an average of about two-thirds for all low-income countries. Finally, while the primary pupil ratio of 41 in Pakistan was higher than the South Asian average of 57, it was substantially below East Asia's 24 and below both low-income country average of 38 and the middle-income average of 25. By all criteria, Pakistan's educational system is at the bottom of the international ladder.
Historically, the literacy rate has increased from 13.2 in 1951 to 21.7 by 1972 to 38.8 by 1996 (Table 4.10). This tripling of the rate suggests that there was a significant improvement since independence. There has been a substantive quantitative expansion at all levels; however, given the high population growth rates, the number of illiterates has continued to grow from 3 million at Partition to 20 million by the early 1980s to 49 million by 1996.
The key factor behind this poor performance has been the low investment and attention given to education. Public pronouncements and ambitious plans notwithstanding,

expenditure on education since independence has remained 1-2 per cent of GNP, lagging considerably behind most developing countries, which spend 3—4 per cent of their GNP on education. Budgetary shortfalls, large military expenditure, huge fiscal deficits are all responsible for this meagre allocation of resources to education. The problem is compounded by the weak demand for education. Consistently, households spend less than 2 per cent of their income on education.
Besides these important statistics, a whole series of additional numbers and evidence points to a system that is inadequate in quantity, deficient in quality, and inequitable in structure, and needs considerable overhauling. A group of disturbing trends emerges when considering the stylized facts.
Firstly, one prominent feature of Pakistan's schooling system has been the relative emphasis on tertiary education. Historically, Pakistan has placed greater emphasis on tertiary education than on basic primary and secondary education (Behrman, 1995). Compared to many low-income countries, the percentage of people at higher levels of education is similar, but the figure for primary and secondary levels is far below any international mean. Central government expenditure has mostly been concentrated on colleges and universities, with 27 per cent of public expenditure on tertiary education in Pakistan in 1985—6, compared to 16 per cent in Malaysia and 9—11 per cent in Indonesia and Korea. This share increased between 1965 and 1985—6, although the tertiary enrolment rate declined during this period. The bias in favour of colleges and universities can be gauged by the fact that the net current expenditure per student on public education in 1990—1 was 1,379 rupees for college as compared to 792 and 841 rupees respectively for primary and secondary education. Amidst a plethora of international economic evidence that suggests that the rate of return on investment in primary education is much higher than that on tertiary education, the Pakistani bias shows an inadequate understanding of the dynamics of educational policy.

A second prominent feature of the educational sector, one which has drawn considerable international attention, is the large gender gaps in schooling (Behrman, 1995) (Table 4.11). In 1990, female adult illiteracy in Pakistan was 79 per cent, in contrast to India's 66 per cent, China's 38 per cent and Sri Lanka's 17 per cent. One has to search very deeply through international statistics to find other countries that have neglected female education as much as Pakistan.
All available indicators suggest relatively large gender gaps favouring males in Pakistani schooling in comparison with the average experience of all low-income countries. Pakistan's 1991 female primary and secondary schooling enrolment rates were 15 per cent and 8 per cent below the total enrolment rates, while those for low-income countries were 8 and 6 per cent, respectively. Furthermore, while mean schooling for males 25 years or older in Pakistan in 1992 was the same as for other developing countries in the same income level, that for females was only 70 per cent of the mean (Mahmood and Zahid, 1992). In addition access to educational facilities has been quite limited for women, with school/ population ratios being quite low. Although primary enrolment rates increased more for women than for men between 1970 and 1996, the change has been too marginal to have any overall impact.
A third feature has been the large regional and rural/urban disparities (Behrman, 1995) (Table 4.12). The ramifications of Pakistan's pro-industry trade and macroeconomic policy on the distribution of educational facilities throughout the country have been considerable. Primary enrolment rates for males in 1991 were over 80 per cent in urban areas of Punjab and the NWFP, but below 50 per cent in Balochistan and barely above 50 per cent in rural areas of Sindh. Similarly, the gender gaps in these enrolment rates ranged from less than 3 per cent in urban areas of Punjab and Sindh to more than 35 per cent in the rural areas of the NW FP and 30 per cent in rural areas of southern Punjab and Balochistan. An examination of the statistics shows a consistent pattern of higher 218
literacy of males in urban areas followed by females in urban areas, with the lowest literacy rates among females in rural areas. With the exception of Punjab, the literacy rate for females in rural areas has remained stubbornly below 10 per cent.
A fourth factor has been the level of waste and inefficiency in the system. Of the various forms of educational waste, such as inability to provide sound facilities to students and inefficiency in the achievement of objectives, dropout has historically been the most important and has resulted in a large number of illiterates. Dropout rates from primary school from 1975 to 1995 were above 50 per cent for males and above 60 per cent for females. While the dropout rates were higher for males at the secondary level than at the primary level, the reverse is true for females. FurthermoreF dropout rates are more prominent in the rural areas, where a combination of poverty, low socioeconomic status, and indifference reduce interest in education.
IMPACT OF SCHOOLING ON ECONOMIC PRODUCTIVITY
In recent years, a large body of academic research under the rubric of 'human capital' economics has examined the linkages between schooling and productivity (Psacharopoulos, 1994). Although the precise chain of causality is unclear, there are abundant indications of a strong causation and influence, The mainline consensus is that primary education continues to be the main investment priority in developing countries; the returns decline by the level of schooling and the country's per capita income; investment in women's education is more profitable than that for men; returns in the private competitive sector are higher than those in the public sector. Two assumptions which underlie the orthodox view have been questioned. Firstly, formal schooling has been taken as the best indicator of human capital accumulation, neglecting informal

education and on-the-job training. Secondly, production-relevant skills are assumed to be embodied to a greater extent in those individuals who have acquired a greater quantity and quality of education, with a 'skills hierarchy' rising from the primary to the tertiary levels. The human capital model has been challenged by the signalling and credentialist schools, with the argument that, while formal education does not give the relevant skills, it signals to the labour market that the individual possesses the capacity to function as a productive member of the market. Part of the controversy between the two schools regards whether the associations between years of schooling and earnings underlying these estimates reflect the causal effect of schooling or whether factors such as unobserved ability, motivation, and family background play an important role. Furthermore, it has been argued that there is a considerable equity-productivity tradeoff, and that gains may be greater from concentrating resources among fewer students with higher quality. In this view, schooling quality is an important part of an educational strategy, and the current bias towards tertiary and against primary schooling is partially justified. This debate involves a contest between egalitarian and elitist models of schooling.
The bulk ofthe literature supports the 'human capital' argument. A surfeit of statistics backs the claims that human capital in Pakistan is weak. A number of empirical studies show that the returns to expanding years of education in Pakistan are still considerable i.e. about 20 per cent compared to the average of 35 per cent for low-income countries (Behrman, 1995) (Table 4.13). The implications of these findings is that Pakistan has lost considerable earnings due to underinvestment in education. A higher rate of return on schooling would considerably boost earnings of the population. However, these rates of return vary depending on the level of schooling. Academic studies have found that the social rate of return of 13 per cent for primary school would, with reinvestment, lead to a doubling of assets within six years (Shabbir, 1994). The private rates of return for tertiary schooling are the highest
 

because of the large subsidies at that level. Because the gaps between the social and the private rates of return are higher at the university and college level, it follows that public educational expenditure has been too concentrated at the higher level and would help increase productivity if concentrated at the primary levels.
In one influential work, an attempt to characterize the cost to Pakistan of having low schooling and a relatively large gender gap by a series of simulations based on pooled estimates of the dependence of economic growth on initial schooling investments, the authors find that Pakistan's 1985 income would have been 25 per cent higher if Pakistan had had Indonesia's 1960 primary enrolment rate, and about 16 per cent higher if female enrolment rates had been at the same level as for boys (Birdsall, Ross and, Sabot, 1993).
The gender gap in educational opportunity in Pakistan suggests that the country has foregone a great opportunity by not capitalizing on the large rates of return of female schooling on economic productivity. In a study of estimates of wage relations for males and females separately over several time periods using Household Income and Expenditure Surveys, it was found that females had higher rates of return than their male counterparts during both the late 1970s and the mid-1980s (Ashrafand Ashraf, 1993). Some estimates suggest that the return on getting more girls into schooling may be over 20 per cent. An assessment of the empirical magnitude needs to be taken with some caution because the spillover effects of higher female literacy on female health and family planning use have not been precisely quantified. The externalities of knowledge that lie at the heart of the 'new growth theories' are nevertheless important factors to consider when deciding an educational policy.
With regard to regional disparities, the finding is the opposite. Estimates for males in different regions find that the rate of return in Punjab has been slightly higher than in the other provinces, leading to the unfair implication that there has been too little
	INVESTING IN PEOPLE: EDUCATION, POPULATION	221
schooling in Punjab and too much in Balochistan (Shabbir, 1994). Thus, the efficiency-equity tradeoff presents a policy dilemma.
With regard to the rural-urban divide, estimates in 1988 for males in rural areas place the social rates of return to improving primary school quality to 16.4 per cent, at expanding low-quality primary schools at 13.7 per cent, and to expanding middle schools at 3.4 per cent (Behrman, 1995), thus reiterating the conventional finding that rural primary education should be the main economic priority of developing-country policymakers.
EDUCATIONAL POLICY
In view of the growing criticism of Pakistan's educational policy and its inadequate attempts to boost literacy, the Social Action Plan, under the guidance of the World Bank and a whole new policy package under the Eighth Five-year Plan (1993—8), were designed to improve educational performance. Major components of the plans are to improve basic education, particularly for female children in the rural areas, and to increase the quality of education through better training of teachers and provision of sufficient non-salary current budgets. According to the planners, the total primary enrolment ratio for boys would rise to 95 per cent from the current 85 per cent, that for girls would rise from 54 per cent to 82 per cent, and the overall literacy rates increase to 50 per cent by 1998.
In spite of these ambitious proposals, a number ofcaveats remain. Firstly, the present concerns may not be properly targeted, in respect either of the individuals of interest (enrolment and retention of girls, residents of remote rural areas) or the bottlenecks in the schooling process (shortages of textbooks and other materials). A diffuse plan without proper targets risks becoming ineffective.
Both questions of school availability and school quality must be addressed. It has been found that the availability of a school nearby accounts for one third ofthe gender gap in rural Pakistan
 PAKISTAN: THE ECONOMY OF AN ELITIST STATE
(Behrman, 1995). Furthermore, studies show that the specific schools that students attend have important effects on cognitive achievement and labour market outcomes, but considerable controversy rests on which school indicators—teacher education, teacher/pupil ratio, expenditure per pupil—are important. In the absence of proper criteria to gauge schooling quality, a dense deployment of schooling facilities in rural areas may represent the best hope for educational policy reform in Pakistan.
Secondly, the bulk of educational reforms are targeted at the primary levels, reflecting the mainline consensus that investment in primary education creates the highest social returns for society. However, the inefficiencies of both secondary and higher education are legion, with their inadequate facilities and poor teaching levels. Given the abundant linkages between tertiary schooling quality and international competitiveness, some measures need to be undertaken to remedy the neglect of the tertiary levels.
A third weakness of current proposals and policies has been a predominant concern for improving the supply of schooling, with little attention given to demand (Behrman, 1995). A plethora of academic studies, both internationally and with regard to Pakistan, find household demand factors as important in determining school enrolments, retention, and cognitive achievement as are supply factors. Some estimates suggest that these demand factors account for about two-thirds of the gender gap in cognitive achievement in rural Pakistan] Thus, educational reform that focuses on improving household demand for schooling needs to be thought out and implemented.
Lastly, pilot projects that incorporate the introduction of voucher systems for all schools, the collection and dissemination
 
IAccording to another study, estimates on the predicted probability of boys and girls aged 7-14 in 1991 to enrol yield positive associations with household income, mother ever enrolled, and father literate, suggesting an intergenerational spillover. The association with girls is stronger than with boys, suggesting that the returns to investing in girls is higher than for boys.

of information regarding the value-added of individual schools, the extension and increase of merit awards for teachers and students, the increased empowerment of parents and community members, decentralized procurement of nonsalary materials and staff, and the collection of information about the effectiveness of these projects must be undertaken. These additional features can help improve the informational base of future public policy.
HEALTH
The health and nutritional status of a population in the developing world are not only useful indicators in determining the success of a country's development strategy in alleviating poverty, but they are means to other objectives, such as the increase in labour productivity through income-generating activities. While considered marginal in the early years of development theorizing, their importance has increased since the early 1970s, when it was recognized that a sustained effort to satisfy the 'basic needs' of the population was essential. Systematic work has shown large correlations between per capita income and indicators measuring health and nutritional status. The development trajectory of the rich countries has consistently led to higher life expectancies and lower mortality rates.
Pakistan's performance with regard to the health and nutritional status of the population has been quite negative, with a whole array of statistics showing that Pakistan is on the bottom rung of the development ladder.
THEORETICAL INSIGHTS
In recent years, the 'human capital' school has found that investments in health and nutrition are perhaps as important for increasing economic output as increases in physical capital stock
	PAKISTAN; THE ECONOMY OF AN ELITIST STATE
(Behrman, 1995). Although a part of the 'residual' difference can be explained by education, a significant part of economic output can be explained by the health status of the population.
A large body of academic literature has found that the health and nutritional status of the population has strong consequences on the productivity of the workforce. Debility and malnutrition translate into significant efficiency losses and productivity shortfalls. From estimates of daily caloric need in different occupations, shortfalls in work capacity can be calculated for different levels of shortfall in caloric intake. For many lowincome countries, these shortfalls are almost always very substantial, often as high as 50 per cent. Furthermore, another cost of malnutrition is the reduced number of working years resulting from early death. The age structure and life expectancy rates of developing countries indicate that reductions in adult mortality would not only add years to income-generating lives and reduce the dependency ratios that measure the burden of the older members of society on the younger ones, but also increase the yield on education and other investments in workers. Contrary to the prevailing wisdom that the developing countries suffer from a mass of idle workers whose improvement in health and nutritional status will not increase labour productivity, the 'human capital' school has found that human energy is a critical factor influencing productivity and that it would be simplistic to dismiss the productivity value of nutrition because of the existence of idle adults (Romer, b 1994).
Moreover, an additional benefit of a nutrition programme is the medical costs that can be saved as the demand for medical services decreases. Estimates suggest that about one-third of the sick in developing countries are victims of nutritional disorders. Given the well-known fact that it is much cheaper to prevent malnutrition than to cure it, developing countries' exchequers could be spared a huge financial burden through the encouragement of nutrition education. The literature suggests that the magnitude of money 225 thus made available could be utilized for a range of alternative
programmes.
Although certain links between diet, performance potential, and economic returns are ambiguous and the chain of causation not entirely clear, it has become a truism that the health and nutritional status of a population are one of the crucial factors determining its productivity. An unhealthy and malnourished population is a sure ingredient of failure.
CHARACTERISTICS OF HEALTH AND NUTRITION
The health and nutritional status of Pakistan's population is among the worst in the developing world, according to several indicators (Table 4.15).:
The data on under-5 mortality rates per 1,000 live births reveals similar trende
In addition to these high infant and neonatal mortality rates, maternal mortality rates are relatively high, with differing
 
1The infant mortality rate NMR) per 1,000 live births in 1992 for Pakistan was 88, in contrast to China's 33, India's 65, Sri Lanka's 15, Egypt' 53, and Phil,  ippines' 37. Considerably higher than the mean for low-income countries which is 76, Pakistan's IMR is only higher than certain of the poorest Sub-Saharan countries. In part, the relatively high IMR may reflect the fact that 30 per cent of the babies were reported to have low birth weight, in contrast to the 23.5 of other low-income developing countries Oehrman, 1995). Furthermore, the relatively high IMR is an important component of low life expectancies at birth in Pakistan. although the drop in Pakistan's IMR between 1970 and 1996 has helped increase the life expectancy rate in the last two decades.
'The 1996 Pakistani under-5 mortality rate of 123 is high in comparison with other developing countries. China's 39, India's 85, Kenya's 57, Sri Lanka's 15, Philippines' 37 and, Jordan's 30 once more put Pakistan near the bottom of the international ladder, With the poorest Sub-Saharan economies. The Pakistani rates are higher than the respective means of 102 and 114 for all low-income countries (Behrman, 1995). These high under-5 mortality rates are important components of Pakistani tower life expectancy, but their substantial favouring of females means that mortality rates for other ages must favour males for there to be this equalization of life expectancies at birth.
 

sources giving different rates.4 Thus, Pakistan has the paradoxical combination of lower life expectancy and higher disease prevention.
An analysis of another important indicator—the prevalence of malnutrition among children under-5—presents unfavourable comparisons for Pakistan. In an evaluation of malnutrition from 1987 to 1992 5
An analysis of the data on life expectancy produces a more balanced record (Table 4.14). Pakistan's 1992 life expectancies at birth were four years and two years below the means for Iowincome countries for males and females (Behrman, 1995). Though there was no gender gap in life expectancies within Pakistan, the shortfall in comparison with means for all developing countries were twice as large for females as for males.6 The considerable rise in average life expectancy over the last three decades has resulted in a diminishing of the gap between Pakistan and the developed countries to about 16 years. Thus, Pakistan has made a considerable improvement when compared to the pace of change of other developing countries. The levelling of gender differences seems especially noteworthy.
In terms of health and nutrition inputs, the Pakistani record is mixed (Table 4.15). Population per physician in 1994 in Pakistan was 2,000, and population per nursing person was 3,500, the
 
'The World Bank presenting a figure of 340 per 100,000 live births in 1996. By contrast, morbidity rates for Pakistan present a better picture, with the incidence 5 of tuberculosis and malaria significantly below international comparisons.
Pakistan's figure of 40.4 per cent of children with a deficiency or an excess of nutrients that interfere with their health and their potential for growth is high compared to China's 21.3 per cent, Kenya; 18 per cent, Sri Lankak 36.6 per cent, Honduras' 20.6 per cent, and Egypt' 10.4 per cent. Poverty and poor eating patterns have consigned Pakistani children to the bottom of international figures.
61n 1992 Pakistan's life expectancy was calculated as 59 which put it signihcantly below most countries in Asia. However, it was above, Ethiopia, Sierra Leone, Nigeria, and Congo. On a more positive note, the increases in Pakistani life expectancy between 1970 and 1992 were substantial (12 and 10 years, respectively, for females and males) and larger than the means for all low-income countries, more so for females than for males.

former far below the mean for low-income countries and the latter significantly above the mean for low-income countries, suggesting that there was a much higher availability of physicians per person and physicians per nursing person than on average in low-income countries. The comparable figures for a broad sample of low-income developing countries gives Pakistan a mixed record. Thus, while higher-level medical care seems more easily available in Pakistan, the weak deployment of nursing services diminishes the good physician/patient ratio. However, the fact that 90 per cent of Pakistanis had access to health services in the last decade implies that a respectable patient/doctor ratio has been reached. Combined with a high availability of safe ',vater (74 per cent), pregnant women receiving prenatal care (70 per cent), use of oral rehydration salts to combat diarrhoea (97 per cent), and high immunization rates among one-year-olds (75 per cent), Pakistanß health system does have a few prominent positive measures that dilute the impact of the more grisly statistics.
In terms of government expenditure on health, the share of GDP has historically been low in Pakistan. In 1990 this came to 3.4 per cent of GDP, low in comparison to the international average for low-income countries which is 4.9 per cent. This share has not increased in recent years because ofa combination ofhigh military spending, recurrent fiscal deficits, and low prioritization of health issues.
PRODUCTIVITY IMPACT OF HEALTH AND
NUTRITION
Although the literature on Pakistan is sparse, a considerable body of international work on countries with similar endowments allows one to make inferences on Pakistan. There is considerable evidence that the low health and nutritional status of the population has a 228
deleterious effect on labour productivity and economic growth through both direct and indirect channels of causation.
Health and nutrition have effects on the rest of the economy through their influence on three different variables—labour productivity, schooling productivity, and human fertility (Behrman, 1995). Although it is difficult to quantify these effects because of a series of measurement and analytical problems, the impact is substantial.
Better health and nutrition can increase labour productivity directly by making workers stronger and more energetic. Both weight-for-height and caloric intake have a significant effect on farm output. Micro studies consistently show that farm labour is a consistent function of caloric intake (Behrman, 1995). The quality of labour is an important component of the agriculture production function, and productivity enhancement is critically linked to food supply. An estimate of the impact of caloric consumption on agricultural productivity in Pakistan that distinguishes explicitly between the planting and harvest stages on agricultural production, found that there was no effect on the harvest stage, when food was relatively abundant, but there were significant positive effects of caloric consumption on agricultural production during the planting season. On a more macro level, better nutritional intake leads to higher wages in both the peak season (when greater sustained energy expenditure is required for tasks such as harvesting) and the planting season (where innate strength is important). The main point rs that cross-country associations between health and per capita incomes are abundant. Pakistan's low life expectancies and health have not allowed any dramatic boost in agricultural labour productivity.
Secondly, health and nutrition have a considerable negative impact on schooling productivity in Pakistan. Studies of experimental and socioeconomic survey data on the indirect effects of health and nutrition on cognitive achievement, schooling, and pre-school ability show that there is a strong link between the two.

The consensus is that better endowed children do better at schools and have better health than others.
A whole series of informal linkages shows the interaction between health, socioeconomic status, and productivity. In a series of cross-tabulations from the 1991 Pakistan Integrated Household Survey (PIHS), it was found that infant mortality rates are a third higher for the households in the bottom quintile of expenditure/ income distribution than for other households, a fifth higher in rural than in urban areas, almost two-thirds higher if mothers had no schooling versus some schooling, and over two-fifths above the national average in Balochistan. The reported incidence of diarrhoea for children aged five or younger is about a quarter independent of expenditure or sex of the child, but is lower in urban areas. Urban households are closer to all types of health facilities than their rural counterparts.
UNEMPLOYMENT
A clear understanding of the trends, level, and changes in the unemployment situation of Pakistan is marred by a number of conceptual and empirical problems. The definitions of labour force and unemployment—open, reported, disguised, underemployed— are in themselves highly contentious, but in the case of Pakistan it is further compounded by serious measurement problems.The more comprehensive coverage is provided by the census data for   and 1981.Since then, the pieces have been put together by combining disjointed data from the Demographic Survey and the annual Labour Force Surveys. In recent years the coverage and definitions of these surveys have themselves changed, and thus a comparable time series is hard to construct.
Even if the estimates derived from these sources are accepted at face value with no questioning, the picture that emerges is highly blurred and does not provide hard empirical facts. These data do

not suggest the existence ofany structural unemployment problem in Pakistan over the long term, and indicate only a slight worsening of the situation in recent years.The average rate of unemployment, according to these sources, hovers around 5—6 per cent of the labour force in the 1990s, having risen from 1.7 per cent according to the 1961 census. Urban unemployment estimates place the rate at about 7 per cent.
The biases in these estimates arise from different factors and it is not obvious where they finally end up. First, the labour force itself may be underreported due to the exclusion of both women and those working in the informal sector as well as non-agricultural self-employment in the rural areas. For example, the labour force estimates indicate that the labour force participation rate (LFPR) for females is less than 8 per cent. For the sake ofcomparison, the same rate in India is 30 per cent. The gender bias in measurement and recording is known to be skewed in favour of males, and thus the underreporting of female LFPR could be significantly high. Second, there is a lack of consistency between the sample frames used and the adjustment for undernumeration made in the Demographic Survey and those used for the Labour Force Survey.Third, the labour force surveys have improved the quality of the questionnaires as well as their coverage over time. There appears a tendency to smooth out large variations?
 
IAccording to the most recent estimates (Table •1.16), 37.1 million people participate in the labour force, yielding an aggregate LFPR of 27.4 per cent. According to the 1951 census, the LFPR was 30.5 per cent. The reason why the rate has declined is not clear. The employment estimate based on the current LFPR is 35.1 million; consequently the unemployment rate is 5.37 per cent. If on the other hand, it is assumed that the LFPR remains unchanged at 30.5 per cent as it was in 1951, the true labour force would be 41.2 million and the true unemployment rate could be as high as 15 per cent maintaining the employment numbers at 35.1 million. It may be argued that, for the sake of symmetrical treatment, the reported employment numbers should also be adjusted upwards. If such an adjustment is made the unemployment figure could be close to 10 per cent. The range therefore is wide—betwen 6 to 15 per cent. This exercise demonstrates the highly tenuous nature of officially-reported unemployment figures.
The data presented in Table 4.17 confirm the conventional wisdom about discrimination against females in employment. Notwithstanding all the problems that have been adduced above, the female unemployment ratio in its reported and unadjusted form is unacceptably high—between 14 and 16 per cent. This compares to 5 to 6 per cent for the aggregate and 4 per cent for males. Some of the high incidence may result from the statistical improvement of the labour force survey, but casual empiricism strongly suggests that the barriers to female employment—social, cultural, and religious—remain formidable. Discouraged but involuntary unemployment rates may in fact be much higher.
The above estimates do not include child labour, which has become a burning social issue internationally and which is hurting Pakistani exports of carpets, leather and sports goods etc. A recent survey has estimated that about 8.3 per cent ofchildren between the ages of 5-14 years were economically active. Three-fourths of them were boys and one fourth were girls. As a significant proportion of child labour is employed in export industries, alternative arrangements have to be made urgently to remove children from these industries if Pakistan wants to retain access to markets in the EC and North America.
Attempts to establish a quantitative relationship between economic growth and employment in Pakistan thus suffer from the weak and unsatisfactory basis of the employment data. This has not, however, precluded a number of analysts from estimating the output elasticity of employment for the aggregate as well as for various sectors. Table 4.18 summarizes the various estimates for the different periods. There are serious methodological problems in the estimation of these coefficients and they should be treated with extreme caution, but, if it is assumed that these problems remain constant across various time periods, some tentative conclusions may be offered.
First, there seems to be a decline in the aggregate elasticity over time. By the end of the 1980s, the elasticity was almost halved from the level of the 1960s. In other words, the capacity of the economy to generate the same level of employment required that the growth rates of GDP should at least be twice those attained in the 1951—61 period. Second, despite serious fluctuations in the elasticity of the agriculture sector, the coefficient for the 1980s is extremely low. Whether the rates of GDP growth themselves have much to do with the size of these coefficients is a question that needs to be explored before any serious inferences can be drawn. Third, the services sector, whose share in GDP has risen from one-fourth to one-half and which normally absorbs most of the labour force, does not exhibit significant capacity to do so. This may also be partly due to underreporting in the self-employment and informal sector.
The above picture, if accurate, indicates that the scope for absorbing future additions to the labour force and maintaining socially acceptable unemployment rates is limited even if output growth maintains its high trend rate. The situation may get out of control if unemployment among educated youth rises as a result of greater emphasis on education. This sobering conclusion requires further investigation and policy response if it turns out to be substantiated by careful analysis.
International experience does suggest that in low-income developing countries, small scale agriculture, small and medium enterprises, and, more recently, knowledge-based enterprises are the main avenues for productive employment. This is a strategy which merits serious consideration by the policy makers in Pakistan.
